---
layout: post
title:  January 28, 2016 - Layout
date:   2016-01-28
permalink: lesson-04/
---

##Lesson Plan

1. Review page layout using CSS
2. Talk about Responsive Design
3. Try to replicate some basic layouts

### Writing CSS and Including it on a Page

When writing HTML, we always should include a meta tag with the character set.

```html
<meta charset="utf-8">
```

We also want to be sure to do that in CSS, at the top of our file.

```css
@charset "UTF-8";
```

After that, your style sheet is a list of rules for the browser to follow as it renders the web page.

### DRY Coding

DRY stands for "Don't Repeat Yourself".

Let's say we want to make all of the headings on a page blue.  We could write CSS like follows:

```css
h1 { color: blue; }
h2 { color: blue; }
h3 { color: blue; }
h4 { color: blue; }
```

That's a lot of code for one change, though. We can simplify this by putting all of the selectors on the same line, separated by a comma.

```css
h1, h2, h3, h4 { color: blue; }
```

### Units of Measurement

CSS supports several units of measurement for specifying how big things are and the spaces between them. The easiest ones to think about now are pixels (px) and percentages (%).

- Pixels are pretty straightforward. Your browser window, maximized, is somewhere between 1028 and 1200 pixels wide.  We can use the developer tools to find out the width - open developer tools, then resize your window.  You'll see the size in the top-right corner.
- Percentages are calculated based on the value inherited from the parent element(s).

Whenever you specify values with units in CSS, make sure there's no space between the number and type of units:

**Bad:** `margin: 10 px;`

**Good:** `margin: 10px;`

### CSS Box Model / Box Sizing

One thing that's important to understand about CSS is the **box model**.  You read about this for homework.

- [About the CSS Box Model](http://learnlayout.com/box-model.html)

The way the box model works is frustrating and not very straightforward, so designers typically will set a different `box-sizing` for their page.

- [About Box Sizing](http://learnlayout.com/box-sizing.html)

Remember that `*` selector?  We're going to use that now for making all the things on our page have border-box sizing.

```css
* {
  -webkit-box-sizing: border-box;
     -moz-box-sizing: border-box;
          box-sizing: border-box;
}
```

### CSS Layout

- Utilizing floats
- Clearfix - I like to use [Nicholas Gallagher's Micro-clearfix](http://nicolasgallagher.com/micro-clearfix-hack/).  Copy and paste the following code into your CSS file.

```
/**
 * For modern browsers
 * 1. The space content is one way to avoid an Opera bug when the
 *    contenteditable attribute is included anywhere else in the document.
 *    Otherwise it causes space to appear at the top and bottom of elements
 *    that are clearfixed.
 * 2. The use of `table` rather than `block` is only necessary if using
 *    `:before` to contain the top-margins of child elements.
 */
.cf:before,
.cf:after {
    content: " "; /* 1 */
    display: table; /* 2 */
}

.cf:after {
    clear: both;
}

/**
 * For IE 6/7 only
 * Include this rule to trigger hasLayout and contain floats.
 */
.cf {
    *zoom: 1;
}
```


### Responsive Design

- What is responsive design?
- What are some common design patterns?
- How can we accomplish responsive layouts?
  - think of everything as blocks
  - responsive design patterns

### Coding Work

- Choose one of the mockups and replicate it using HTML and CSS.  Your design doesn't have to be perfectly responsive, but you should not have any fixed-width elements.  Note - these are just simple mock-ups.  Colors, text, and fonts used are just for demonstration purposed - you can choose your own colors and fonts.  Pay attention to white space!

- <a href="../media/0202/layout1.png">Layout #1</a> (note - the round things on this should be social media icons.  You don't have to make them circular.)
- <a href="../media/0202/layout2.png">Layout #2</a>  (note - the round things on this should be social media icons.  You don't have to make them circular.)
- <a href="../media/0202/layout3.png">Layout #3</a>

##Due Tuesday, Feb 2

- [Assignment 1 - CodePen](/assignments/01-codepen.html)
